###### On antibiotics, capital gains, China, America’s civil war, unicorns, ties
# Letters to the editor 
##### A selection of correspondence 
> May 25th 2019 
It is right to direct attention to the serious problem of antimicrobial resistance, but it is wrong to suggest that an unending supply of antimicrobial agents are simply waiting to be discovered if only the proper funding model can be devised (“Netflix and pills”, May 4th). The antibiotic pipeline may not have an infinite reserve of raw material on which to draw. For example, selective evolutionary pressure caused by the use of antibiotics could enable microbes to resemble their host environments in important ways that frustrate targeted approaches to treatment, raise development costs, or increase toxicity. 
It is unclear whether a system dependent on endlessly churning out new and evermore expensive medicines will be either economically feasible or scientifically possible in the long term. Greater priority should be given to implementing more permanent solutions that are not limited to slowing resistance. No single approach is likely to be sufficient, so governments should begin by reviving the moribund vision of using the vaccines, treatments and other tools that are already at hand to eradicate disease and thereby stop—not slow—the development of resistance. Eradication may not currently be possible for every disease, but for those diseases where it is possible, the window of opportunity may fast be closing. 
JONATHAN DARROWHarvard Medical SchoolBoston 
TIMO MINSSENDirectorCentre for Advanced Studies in Biomedical Innovation LawUniversity of Copenhagen 
“Capital gains” (April 20th) discussed the push for Washington, DC, to become a state. One solution to this perennial thorny issue is to pare back the District of Columbia to just the White House, the Capitol and the Supreme Court. The remainder of the District could then be transferred to the adjacent state of Maryland. Such a retrocession has a precedent. A sizeable portion of the District was returned to the state of Virginia in 1847. 
Maryland and Washington already have nearly identical median household incomes, so neither jurisdiction would be made worse off by the addition of the other. And Maryland is already a stalwart Democratic state, so the national electoral calculus would not be affected. 
ALEX CABOTBoston 
Your article about the 100th anniversary of the May 4th Movement in China drew some broad comparisons between that event, the 1989 student protests and current campus activists (“Tiananmen 1919”, May 4th). However, it overlooked one salient fact, namely China’s ageing population. All large-scale incidents of youth mobilisation for political protest in China over the 20th century occurred under conditions of a “youth bulge” when 15- to 25-year-olds made up more than 30% of the adult population. 
Since 1989, the youth share has halved to just 15% of the population. It is unlikely that another Tiananmen will occur because the centre of gravity has shifted to more mature age cohorts holding more conservative attitudes. China is a rare case of an authoritarian system that has grown old before it transitioned to democracy. 
BJöRN ALPERMANNChair of contemporary Chinese studiesUniversity of WürzburgWürzburg, Germany 
I am sure that Henry Louis Gates junior covered it, but your review of his latest book implies that after America’s civil war, Reconstruction ended because “the North tired of browbeating the South” (“A kind of freedom”, April 27th). 
Another way of looking at it is that a crooked presidential election in 1876, disputed by both Democrats and Republicans, led to an agreement whereby the Democrats conceded the election to Rutherford B. Hayes, in return for the Republicans pulling the remaining federal troops from the southern states. Once those troops were out, Reconstruction officially ended, and 100 years of vicious, unrelenting torment for black citizens in the South began. 
GLENN KRASNERNew York 
“The trouble with tech unicorns” (April 20th) discussed the lack of profits at the startups that are coming to market. There is another animal in the business menagerie: zebras. These are companies that actually generate profits and usually do some good for society at the same time. 
When investors chase mythical unicorns instead of nurturing real zebras, they hurt those smaller, profitable companies. So in a very real sense, unicorns gore zebras. Zebras are also the manifestation of a new species of startup, one that is real and can sustain itself. Zebras do not enrich their funders quite so much, but instead create value for consumers and themselves with less artificial subsidy. 
STEVE BACHARManaging partnerEmpowerment CapitalDenver 
Regarding comparisons of the unicorns to the dotcom bubble of the late 1990s, I lived in Berkeley at the time, just two traffic jams north of Silicon Valley, and worked for seven internet startups. Then as now, we worried about economies of scale, entry barriers and profitability. Then, the mantra was “get big fast”. Today it is called “blitzscaling”. Both mean buying customers at any price and deferring profits in favour of user numbers that will impress investors. 
We operated on the assumption that we would find ways to monetise the customers we had paid for, even if we didn’t yet know exactly how our business model would work. None of the firms I worked for got it right before the money ran out. 
All frenzies are distinct. The scale is different today, and interest rates are lower. But the mindset is the same: fast growth, fast money, fast IPO before the venture capitalists’ money runs out. Like all bubbles stretching back to tulips, I expect the results will be similar. 
CARL THELENSan Pablo, California 
I was shocked to read Bartleby’s unfounded claim that the tie was “a functionally useless garment that constricted male necks for a century” (May 4th). True, the tie is no longer regularly used to protect the neck during close combat, but it retains a vital function for the modern male: wiping and cleaning one’s eyeglasses. 
PROFESSOR MICHAEL MALLOYMcGeorge School of LawSacramento, California 
Glenn O’Brien observed in “How to Be a Man”, that the necktie’s “almost transcendental uselessness” is, in fact, its essential quality. A necktie’s sole purpose is beauty. Or as Mr O’Brien put it: “The functionless tie is to the wardrobe what the functionless soul is to the body. It is pure poetry.” 
BEN CLICKWashington, DC 
The demise of the male tie is somewhat premature. It has a function that is necessary and desirable: the partial cover-up of an extended gut, of which we have many. 
ANDREW RUTTERTucson, Arizona 
