###### On Narendra Modi, religion, Brexit, YouTube, monarchies
# Letters to the editor 
##### A selection of correspondence 
> May 16th 2019 
Your latest fulminations against Narendra Modi (“Agent Orange”, May 4th) follow a line of attack at The Economist based on innuendo and indefensible criticisms. Thus, you fault India’s prime minister for his handling of the dastardly Pulwama attack, masterminded by Pakistani terrorists, but neglect to tell the reader that his actions received unqualified approval from all Western democracies. You claim demonetisation caused “huge disruption” to farmers and small businesses, but cite no data or surveys substantiating it. In fact, a study co-authored by Gita Gopinath, the director of research at the IMF and a critic of demonetisation, finds that the effects dissipated within a few months and the growth rate during the year of demonetisation fell by no more than 0.5% on account of the measure. 
Finally, in a delicious irony, you accuse Mr Modi of “controlling and bullying critics”, while basing your entire tirade against him on the commentaries by those same critics. It appears your magazine, too, has completed its descent into the post-truth world. 
JAGDISH BHAGWATIARVIND PANAGARIYABoth at Columbia UniversityNew York 
PRAVIN KRISHNAJohns Hopkins UniversityBaltimore 
The logistics of organising an election where almost a billion people will vote in this vast land is in itself worthy of praise by The Economist. So far the elections have been conducted peacefully and in one case officers travelled days to reach a village where there was only one voter. 
The people of India want a leader who is not corrupt and who will bring peace and prosperity. Narendra Modi has provided that over the past five years. Bureaucracy has been trimmed, millions of people have been lifted from poverty, electricity has been provided to villages and towns. Mr Modi, however, does not hide the fact that the concerns of the vast majority of Hindus should be taken into account while at the same time providing every opportunity to minorities. The left-leaning liberals cannot tolerate this. The prime minister promises to provide a strong, nationalist government that will no longer act weakly, instead putting India’s interests first. Left-wing liberals and academics are stuck in an ideological prism that in reality brought no progress to the minorities they champion the cause of. Under Mr Modi all Indians, irrespective of their caste or creed, will be given the chance to progress. 
NITIN MEHTALondon 
It is a mistake to conclude that America’s young are not religious (“To be young is not quite heaven”, April 27th). They are, in practice, extremely so. It is just that the accoutrements, creeds and god have changed. Their prayer books and rosaries have been replaced by iPhones, their prophets are in Silicon Valley, and their god is the one they see each morning in the mirror, but their devotion to all of these is religious. 
REV. DOUGLAS BUCHANANVirginia Beach, Virginia 
It wasn’t the UK Independence Party’s good result in the European Parliament election of 2014 that panicked David Cameron into calling the Brexit referendum (Bagehot, April 27th). Mr Cameron had already announced his proposal in January 2013. Before that, in 2009, the Tory leader withdrew his party from the centre-right federation in Europe, the European People’s Party. 
I observed Mr Cameron’s approach to Europe from 2001, when he entered the House of Commons. It was always to denigrate, sneer at or mock any EU proposal and brand Tony Blair and Gordon Brown as puppets of Brussels. 
It is fashionable to blame Brexit on Nigel Farage, and he dons the mantle willingly. But in truth, it was the relentless pandering of the Conservative Party to simplistic anti-Europeanism between 1997 and the beginning of the Brexit campaign in 2016 that created the culture of hostility to European partnership that led to the vote to leave Europe. 
If Lord North lost America, David Cameron lost Europe. Nigel Farage was a bit player. 
DENIS MACSHANEFormer Europe ministerLondon 
Regarding the tricky task of policing YouTube (“Now playing, everywhere”, May 4th), I recall that newspapers printed pictures of the hanging of Mussolini, the shooting by a pistol to the head of a young (alleged) Vietcong, a naked girl fleeing her bombed Vietnamese village and innumerable other comparable events, some of which won prizes for the photographer. You can still see on YouTube film footage of the arrest and trial of the Ceausescus in Romania and view their recently killed bodies. 
All these were on the front pages of serious newspapers or reputed television programmes, sometimes with warnings for the more fragile viewers, but with few thinking that they should not have been shown. The triumphalism of Islamic State’s media certainly grates on the Western viewer, but what exactly makes their execution videos so self-evidently unshowable? Not just “the oxygen of publicity”, as we well knew the term decades ago when it referred to the IRA. 
HILARY POTTSLondon 
There are two additional factors to the ones you mentioned in “Sovereign immunity” (April 27th) that explain why constitutional monarchies have survived modernity. First is the concept of the “loyal opposition”, an important and underappreciated element of the British constitution. In the lead up to the Iraq war, Britons who opposed the military getting involved were not accused of being unpatriotic, as opponents to the war in America were. The distinction between loyalty to country and loyalty to a particular government is much stronger in Britain, and it is the monarchy that underpins this. 
Second, when democracy is threatened, a monarch’s historical gravitas can help protect it. For all his later elephant-shooting foibles, Juan Carlos of Spain laid the foundations of Spanish democracy in the late 1970s and played a crucial role in ending an anti-democratic attempted coup in 1981. 
WILLOUGHBY JOHNSONWestwood Hills, Kansas 
It is much easier to get rid of a monarch than to install one. If you are lucky enough to have retained one, hang onto it. Restoration will be impossible. The power of constitutional monarchies depends on circumstances and history but is often underestimated. The monarch not only provides a psychological centre but can sometimes provide discreet guidance to help overcome difficulties in forming a government. 
JACK AUBERTFalls Church, Virginia 
At a conference in Cairo in 1948, King Farouk of Egypt told a British diplomat that, “The whole world is in revolt. Soon there will be only five kings left—the King of England, the King of Spades, the King of Clubs, the King of Hearts and the King of Diamonds.” Farouk was right; he was overthrown by a coup in 1952. 
GERARD PONSFORDWhite Rock, Canada 
