###### On Brazil, water, chess, Britain, criminal justice, Germany, the bible, presenteeism
# Letters to the editor 
> Jun 15th 2019 
Your leader and article on the militias operating in Rio de Janeiro criticised Brazil’s public-security policies (“Fighting thugs with thugs” and “Shadow state”, June 1st). It is natural that policies be debated and differences discussed. But it is not acceptable for The Economist to insinuate, and at one point bluntly affirm, that the new government in Brazil has “links” with the militias. That is an irresponsible claim. 
The federal government has taken decisive steps to combat organised crime in general and militias in particular. For instance, it has sent draft legislation to congress that clearly identifies militias and drug-trafficking factions as criminal organisations. It has also proposed that the leaders of these organisations face tougher prison sentences. These are but a few indications of the Brazilian government’s firm determination to promote public security. 
FRED ARRUDAAmbassador of BrazilLondon 
The long list of recommendations you provided to deal with this problem—reform institutions, fairer services, a crackdown on corruption—omitted one item. The favelas will remain mired in drug-related violence because of the demand for illegal drugs. 
MARSHAL ALAN PHILLIPSCuritiba, Brazil 
“Save the swamp” (May 25th) is correct in saying that nitrate is a big contributor to the dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. The reduction in oxygen is caused by the difference in density of the fresh water from the Mississippi that runs into the salty waters of the Gulf. But the surface layer is relatively fresh and therefore less dense, and does not have low oxygen levels. Its oxygen concentrations are essentially in equilibrium with the atmosphere. The excess nitrate from the river supports algal blooms in the coastal zone, and it is these blooms that reduce the oxygen levels in the bottom layer once they die and sink. The main thrust of the article, that wetlands can help reduce nitrate pollution, is certainly right. 
PIERS CHAPMANDepartment of OceanographyTexas A & M UniversityCollege Station, Texas 
Johnson denigrated the pawn in chess by comparing the piece to a simple foot soldier that is “lowly and dispensable” (May 11th). This greatly underestimates their role. François-André Danican Philidor, who wrote about the game in the 18th century, described pawns as “the soul of chess”. 
GERO JUNGMontreux, Switzerland 
I take issue with Bagehot’s remark, in his column on Boris Johnson, that the Tories punted and “won big” when they chose Winston Churchill, another “maverick”, as their leader (May 25th). Churchill became prime minister not because the Conservatives thought he could lead them to electoral success, but because he was the only figure who could form a national coalition to tackle the worst crisis in British history. Britain did “win big”, but the Conservatives did not. At Churchill’s first electoral test, in 1945, they spectacularly lost. Churchill, like Benjamin Disraeli, another Tory leader mentioned in the column, achieved greatness by service to their country, not to their party. Their biggest accomplishments were cross-party in nature: leading the wartime coalition for Churchill, passing the 1867 Reform Act with the support of radical Liberals for Disraeli. 
R.L.F. CALDERLondon 
I first became acquainted with Boris Johnson through an episode of “Top Gear”. I thought his oafish, buffoonish manner was the typical politician’s shtick. As I idly followed him over the years I realised he wasn’t putting on an act. His callous refusal to accept even basic facts when shamelessly trolling for the position of prime minister by shilling Brexit was awful. It would be appalling if the Conservatives were to choose him as their leader. But having watched the Republican Party sell out every principle in the pursuit of power, and succeeding somewhat, I can almost understand their actions. 
CARL OWENMoore, Oklahoma 
Computer algorithms are already being misused in the criminal-justice system (“Files, not faces”, May 25th). A study by ProPublica examined 7,000 computer-generated “risk-assessment scores” on scores of people arrested in Broward County, Florida, in 2013 and 2014. It found that only 20% of those predicted to commit violent crimes went on to do so. Police may despise the grind of old fashion paper-pushing, but without much testing we are adopting these technologies at our peril. 
PETER TUTHSResearch associateOpen Government Partnership 
Another reason for the lack of skilled labour in Germany is the reluctance of school-leavers to take advantage of the admirable dual-education system, and instead enroll at a university (“Opening up a crack”, May 18th). The problem is that every pupil who has passed the school-leaving exam, the Abitur, has the constitutional right to a place at university, even if he or she has to wait some semesters and has no real academic inclinations or talents. The result is a proliferation of abstruse and socially irrelevant courses, a drop-out rate of about 30% (a shocking waste of human and financial resources) and the lack of skilled workers you mentioned. 
Having spent 20 years as a lecturer, I can testify to the often poor quality of students at hopelessly overcrowded public universities and the high quality of those at private institutions, which have strict admission requirements. But in our modern, democratic society everybody is at least a manager and selection is frowned upon. That attitude is leading to big problems for the German economy. 
ROGER GRAVESWentorf, Germany 
An article on success in academia presented yet another example of the application of Matthew, chapter 13, verse 12, to worldly affairs (“Never give up”, May 11th). “For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.” A more in-depth reading of those words in Matthew’s Gospel reveals two important points. First, it is clear that Matthew is talking about spiritual knowledge, and not material matters. And second, Matthew suggests that serious and regular devotion to acquiring such knowledge is especially beneficial. 
In that sense, Matthew anticipates your own conclusion: “If at first you don’t succeed, try, try, try again.” 
CHRISTOPH STEINBRUCHELNashville, Tennessee 
Those who are sympathetic to Bartleby’s intelligent critique of presenteeism at work (“The joy of absence”, May 18th) should also remember Woody Allen’s quip that 80% of success is showing up. 
YACOV ARNOPOLINLondon  
