###### On the Sahel, Australia, India, smart speakers, Venezuela, IKEA, joke politicians
# Letters to the editor 
##### A selection of correspondence 
> May 30th 2019 
Your article on the spreading jihadist menace in the Sahel, and the poor response to it by some governments, should ring alarm bells (“The West’s forgotten wars”, May 4th). I served with American forces in Africa in 2011. Although unquestionably competent, they were badly overstretched and, given the challenge, heavily focused on containing the chaos emanating from Somalia. 
Perhaps not unreasonably, the Americans also felt that Europeans could do more; after all, the consequences of collapsing states or the unchecked rise of west African jihadist movements would be felt most keenly in Europe. That geopolitical analysis still holds good, but its salience is not felt keenly enough. Formulating a robust enough response would be a classic role for an “EU army”. Britain, in or out of the EU, should be supportive of that initiative. 
In addition to a military response, the West must support and help transform the governments of the region. In AFRICOM we had strong civil- affairs components but they were designed as tactical enablers, not strategic transformers of a country’s polity. Moreover, we should be careful of criticising an over-reliance on sometimes ill-trained and ill-disciplined pro-government militias. Their behaviour needs to improve, certainly, but often they are the only readily mobile source of security. Their use reflects a state’s limited capacity and capability, not any inbuilt malevolence. 
COLONEL (RET’D) SIMON DIGGINSCombined Joint Task Force Horn of Africa, AFRICOM, 2011Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire 
Judging from the tone of your article previewing the Australian election (“Heated debate”, May 18th) you are probably bemused as to how the Liberal coalition, with its “reactionary” view on climate change, won the poll. Could it be that the Australian deplorables grew tired of being harangued by climate ideologues and comfortably well-off inner-city dwellers? 
GEORGE KINGMelbourne 
I take issue with the support for Narendra Modi expressed in your letters page (May 18th). Unemployment in India is at a multi-decade high, investment has fallen, and the increased import of lentils, despite bumper domestic crops, has resulted in a higher suicide rate among farmers. These facts were overlooked by Jagdish Bhagwati and his colleagues. Nitin Mehta papered over the failures of the Modi regime; in fact, only 10% of rural electrification has been achieved in real terms. 
Airing deep delusional concerns of the plight of the majority Hindus is a familiar canard. As a member of a minority community (I am a Sikh married to a Parsi), I have heard this all my life. Blaming the troubles of Hindus, who constitute 80% of the population, on half a dozen minorities is pathetic. This kind of thinking is irrational, petty, irresponsible and harmful to the sanctity of the country. 
RAJINDAR SINGHColorado Springs 
I enjoyed your myth-busting leader on the growth of voice-assistants on the internet (“How creepy is your smart speaker?” May 11th). But the dichotomy you posited between convenience and privacy is a false one and risks misleading businesses. Allowing Alexa, or any similar smart device, into our homes does not entail a tacit forfeiture of privacy. This is certainly the regulators’ view. The sweeping online-privacy rules outlined in Europe’s GDPR, and California’s CCPA, are intended to empower consumers against Big Tech. I predict there will be both higher fines under the new laws and even further regulations as our devices continue to get smarter. Businesses must take note: regulators have new powers and they will flex their muscles to avoid any sleepwalking into a surveillance society. 
Irrespective of whether fears are overblown, what matters is that there has been a sea change in the laws and those looking to monetise big data now have a much heavier legal burden on their shoulders. Offering convenience will be no defence of overreach in the use of personal data. 
RAFI AZIM-KHANHead of data privacy, EuropePillsbury Winthrop Shaw PittmanLondon 
Drug pricing* Regarding your online article on “The global battle over high drug prices” (May 21st), we believe that improving affordability and access to medicines and vaccines is a multidimensional challenge that requires collaborative and holistic solutions from all stakeholders. The single focus on price falls far short of the complexity of access issues, and disclosure of “net” prices and R&D costs is no panacea, but a double-edged sword. Almost 20 years after the Abuja declaration only three out of 54 African countries meet the target of spending 15% of their budget on health care. Industry needs to play its part in making medicines more affordable, but affordability and access for patients can only be achieved through stronger health systems and better financial protection of patients.THOMAS CUENIDirector generalInternational Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and AssociationsGeneva 
There seems to be amnesia about the recent history of interventions by Western powers (“How to get rid of Maduro”, May 4th). Whatever the faults of Nicolás Maduro (which are many), whatever the shortcomings of Venezuela’s elections (which are almost as many), and whatever the state of Venezuela itself (parlous), military coups supported by hostile foreign powers are not instruments of democracy. And they usually make bad situations worse. 
Your newspaper cannot have forgotten that military intervention in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Syria turned those countries into bloody quagmires. Nor that Western support for Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi’s coup in Egypt has resulted in stagnation and repression. The Economist must also be perfectly aware of the lowlights of American policy in Latin America: Chile, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama and, under the guise of the war on drugs, Colombia and Mexico. 
It is unlikely this time will be different. Perhaps the failure of the coup in Caracas has something to do with Venezuelans’ view of that history. 
GEORGE VENNINGLondon 
Charlemagne exhorted European politicians to go to the suburbs, “where the IKEAs are”, to get a real understanding of where Europe’s political faultlines lie (May 11th). But although he, and Renzo Piano, may be right in thinking there is more energy in the peripheries than the centres of large cities, IKEA no longer agrees. 
With the opening of its store in central Paris and plans for many more to come in city centres, IKEA is throwing its lot in with bearded cyclists and flat-white drinkers. 
ANDREW GAINESBrussels 
I laughed at your take on the comedic aspects of today’s politicians (“You couldn’t make it up”, May 18th). Another politician who should have made your list is Dilma Rousseff, a former president of Brazil. She once stated that “We are not going to set a goal. We are going to leave the goal open, but, when we reach our goal, we are going to double it.” But Ms Rousseff’s best one-liner came during her campaign in 2014: “I don’t think that whoever might win or lose, will either win or lose. Everybody will lose.” 
GUSTAVO BRUGNOLIBelo Horizonte, Brazil 
Raul Labrador, a Republican congressman, told a town-hall meeting in 2017 that “Nobody dies because they don’t have access to health care.” 
FRANK ROBINSONAlbany, New York 
Allan Lamport, a mayor of Toronto in the 1950s, said, “If I’m going to be pushed off a cliff, I want to be there.” 
CEC JENNINGSToronto 
* Letters appear online only 
