###### On psychiatry, the EU, ballot initiatives, Huawei, air pollution, measles, Hell
# Letters to the editor 
##### A selection of correspondence 
> May 9th 2019 
Your review of two psychiatry books made so many assertions in need of contextualisation that I must condense my points (“The wisdom of sorrow”, April 13th). Diagnostic thresholds are falling, and the prescription of contested medications (statins, aspirin) are increasing, across all areas of medicine, not just psychiatry; the harm wrought by missteps in medicine’s history are by no means confined to the 1800s and greatly exceed the equivalent in psychiatry; the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders explicitly warns against the “checklist approach to diagnosis” of which you accuse it; and, despite being a psychiatrist myself, I have yet to meet a single one who says we understand the “chemical imbalance” that you say we say causes mental illness: humans are clearly vastly more complex than that. 
Here are some facts. Suicide is falling globally; numerous studies and millions of patients confirm the usefulness of psychiatry treatments; we don’t know the biological basis of mental illness because we don’t know how the brain works on a good day, let alone a bad one; and—guess what?—psychiatry, like all areas of medicine, is imperfect and we must do better. We will. 
BRENDAN KELLYProfessor of psychiatryTrinity College Dublin 
There’s no question that the reason medications have endured is because they have helped a lot of people. I am a psychiatrist. Over two days, I treated a man who had stabbed another in a fit of jealousy and whose mood disorder is now controlled, buying him time in the arduous process of learning self-restraint. I saw a woman who had fried her brain with meth and who, with an antipsychotic, is able to function and keep from harming. Another woman who is able to remain in college because her concentration is sufficiently better. And a man whose crippling anxiety was relieved, permitting him to start developing work skills. 
Would these goals have been achievable in the days before Big Pharma stepped in? In the case of the man with the mood disorder and the meth abuser, definitely not. In the other two, yes, with a great deal of patience and determination. Big Pharma has serious drawbacks. There is a risk of over-reliance on medication at the expense of relationship-building and exploring emotional conflict. But meds have earned a place in the fight against disabling illness. 
OSCAR VALDESLos Angeles 
Charlemagne argued that the forthcoming European Parliament elections will be the most European yet (April 27th). No doubt: a wave of recent events, including Brexit, have triggered an unprecedented Europeanisation of the European political debate. Yet this process has been paralleled by a renationalisation of EU politics. Indeed, as suggested by the national flavour of the electoral campaigns in most EU countries, the transformation of European politics does not only struggle to find its expression, but is also resisted by the national political class. In the absence of a genuine European party system and corresponding public sphere, EU politics is set to remain a national affair. 
ALBERTO ALEMANNOProfessor of EU lawHEC Paris 
I find it a little odd that you think only Republican state legislatures are trying to overturn voters’ ballot-initiatives (“Nock, Nock”, April 20th). In California we have had two recent examples of a rebellion by the Democratic legislature and governor against voters’ wishes. Last November we overwhelmingly rejected a repeal of rent control. Four months later our legislature proposed a bill to reverse that. And in 2012 and 2016 we voted in favour of the death penalty. However our new governor has recently declared a moratorium on executions. The problem you reported on is hardly unique to the Republican Party. 
JERRY JOHNSONSanta Clarita, California 
Last year we voted to reject limitations on fracking in Colorado, understanding the huge economic benefits to our state. Now our Democratic legislature is trying to change that. Apparently these lawmakers think they know better than their constituents. 
DALE DECKEEagle, Colorado 
It is unlikely that Huawei fixes all but the most critical security-related issues the moment they’re found, but instead maintains an inventory of known vulnerabilities, bugs and sloppy code (“The right call on Huawei”, April 27th). Therefore, because Britain has decided to work with Huawei’s equipment and not shut it out, it presumably has knowledge of such an inventory, which its intelligence agencies could exploit if they want to compromise other networks that use Huawei’s gear. 
CHRIS SHAFFERNew York 
You asserted that the challenge of implementing geoengineering to alleviate climate change is that the benefits are global whereas the costs are local (Free exchange, April 27th). However, there are big near-term benefits to be had from decarbonising the economy, many of which are predominantly local. One is the potential to reduce the unacceptable burden of air pollution on health. One recent estimate suggests that 3.5m premature deaths could be averted each year by a rapid phase out of fossil fuels. If the health co-benefits of decarbonisation are monetised using the value of a statistical life, on a global scale they substantially outweigh the policy costs of achieving the target emissions cuts in the Paris climate agreement. That is an extra incentive to bring about rapid decarbonisation. 
PROFESSOR SIR ANDY HAINEDepartment of Public HealthLondon School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
Parents who do not vaccinate their children are playing Russian roulette (“The needle and the damage avoided”, April 20th). Measles is so highly contagious that any unvaccinated child is highly likely to contract the disease during an outbreak. Worse still, measles is a serious disease. The mortality rate is on the order of one per thousand cases. If parents were to shrug off such odds thinking they are small, they should think again. They would never put their child (or themselves) on a plane when the chance of crashing were that large. If there were 10,000 flights a day in America, at that rate you would have ten planes crashing every day. 
EDUARDO KAUSELProfessor emeritusMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyCambridge, Massachusetts 
As a lifelong resident of the area close to Hell, Michigan, I enjoyed your article (“Lessons from Hell”, April 13th). I am 75, but I recall taking a scout canoe trip as a youth to the “dam[n] site” at Hell, with its deep pool where we could plunge in. Within 20 miles of Hell is a similar historic mill site that still shows up on our maps as Jerusalem. As locals note, one can literally go from Jerusalem to Hell in about 30 minutes. 
PETER FLINTOFChelsea, Michigan 
